Translator: Nadine Hennig
Reviewer: Robert Tucker
Hello everybody.
Audience: Hello.
Keith Lowe: Fantastic! This is
like a schoolroom or something.
(Laughter)
My name is Keith Lowe.
I am an historian
of the Second World War
and its aftermath,
and even I have to admit
that I've chosen
a pretty crowded field to study.
I went into my local bookshop recently,
and this is what I saw.
Thousands of books
about the Second World War
are published every year,
and, actually, to tell you the truth,
this is only a very tiny selection
of what's on offer.
We in the West,
and, actually, increasingly people
in other parts of the world too,
we are just a little bit obsessed
by the Second World War.
We have whole TV stations
which seem devoted to it.
We write books about it,
we write novels about it,
we make films about it.
We have university courses
which are devoted to the Second World War.
Whole museums are built
to house World War II collections.
Even our politicians
like to get in on this act.
Whenever there is
an important anniversary of the war,
they tend to gather and commemorate it,
and make speeches.
So, for example, at the 70th anniversary
of the D-Day landings,
June 2014,
17 heads of state took time out
of their schedules
to come and spend the day
on the Normandy beaches.
Seventeen!
This included people
like Barack Obama, Vladimir Putin,
the chancellor of Germany,
Angela Merkel, and so on.
From my own country,
we sent not only our Prime Minister,
but also Queen Elisabeth II,
who is - I mean, she is now
in her nineties
and largely retired from public life.
What other international event
can do all this?
Even international summits struggle
to get so many world leaders
into one place at the same time.
My question is: Why?
What is it that all these world leaders,
in fact what is it that all of us,
think it is that we're remembering?
Why are we all so obsessed
by the the Second World War?
You might think that somebody like me
would be pretty pleased
with this situation.
As long as the World War II
industry is booming,
I am always going to have a job, right?
But actually there is something about it
that I find really
a little bit disturbing,
and I don't know
whether that is just because
I have an inherent distrust
of a lot of politicians,
or whether it's because I've been trained
to always question everything.
But it strikes me
that a lot of the rhetoric
that gets thrown around
about the Second World War,
particularly by people like politicians
and journalists and diplomats and so on,
a lot of it doesn't seem to be
about the Second World War at all;
it seems to be about something else.
I'm not sure if I've exactly put my finger
on precisely what that thing is,
but it seems to be something like a way
of fostering national pride,
or just trying to get people
to feel good about themselves.
Along the way, it seems to me
that the Second World War has been
turned into a little bit of a cartoon,
where everybody knows
who the good guys were,
and everybody knows who the bad guys were.
There is precious little
space left anymore
for any of that difficult
grey area in between.
To give you some kind of an idea
about what on earth it is
I am going on about,
let me tell you a story
from my own country, from Britain.
In Britain, we like to think
we are the real heroes
of the Second World War.
We tell stories about
how we stood alone against the Nazis,
about how we endured
the bombing of the Blitz;
how we kept calm and carried on,
and eventually fought
our way back into Europe
and liberated it.
We still call the Second World War
"Our Finest Hour",
as if it is some kind
of golden age in our history.
So whenever there is
any kind of anniversary,
or important event based
around the Second World War,
we Brits really go for it.
One of these events happened
quite recently, in the summer of 2012,
when we opened up a brand new war memorial
right in the middle of central London.
It was a memorial
to the men of Bomber Command,
the men who flew the planes over Germany,
dropped bombs and so on.
This is what it looks like.
As you can see, it's not exactly
a shy and retiring piece of architecture,
it's actually quite huge.
It's by far the largest war memorial
that we have in London,
and I can tell you there are
a lot of war memorials in London.
As you walk into this thing,
there is an inscription which tells you
that it's dedicated
to the 55,000 men of Bomber Command
who lost their lives during World War II.
Now, when this first opened,
in the summer of 2012,
I went along to have a look,
see what I thought of it,
have a walk around.
There is something
really quite moving about it actually.
You step in through
these great big pillars,
and, up on the wall,
you can see carved into the stone,
there is a quotation
from Winston Churchill
saying exactly how much we owe
to these men who lost their lives.
Parts of the memorial are built
out of an actual World War II aircraft
that was shot down during the war.
So they put a lot of thought into this.
It's actually really quite inspiring.
So as I was walking around this monument,
I couldn't help but feel
this real surge of pride.
I felt proud of these men
who had given their lives
for something that I hold dear.
I felt proud of my country,
I felt proud of the British way of life
which had produced heroes like this.
And yet,
there was this little voice
in the back of my head
which just wouldn't go away
because I know that 55,000 men
of Bomber Command
died during World War II,
but I also know that 500,000 Germans
died beneath the bombs
that these men dropped.
A lot of those Germans were Nazis,
and I dare say that a lot of them
probably deserved it.
But the vast majority of these people
were just ordinary men, women
and children, just like you and me.
Are any of these people at all
mentioned on this memorial?
Of course they are not.
If you would suggest such a thing
in the summer of 2012,
you probably would have been lynched.
The Germans were our enemies
during the Second World War.
You can't mention the Germans
on a British national monument.
And yet not to mention them,
to pretend that somehow
this didn't happen,
or even worse, that somehow
it doesn't matter,
that too makes me feel
a little bit uncomfortable.
Okay, the Germans are a difficult problem,
so let's just put them
to one side for a minute,
and let's think instead about
the other nationalities.
And here is where the story
starts getting interesting.
Because if there is one thing
that we Brits always forget about
the bomber war,
it's the fact that we didn't
only bomb Germany.
More than a third of British and American
bombs dropped on Europe during the war
were dropped not on Germany
but on those countries
we were supposed to be liberating.
As a consequence,
50,000 French civilians
were killed by our bombs.
10,000 Dutch civilians
Are any of these people
mentioned on this memorial?
Of course they're not.
And it was while I was thinking
about that particular group,
that it finally dawned on me -
actually something I probably should
have realized right from the start -
which is that memorials like this
aren't designed to tell the whole story;
they are only designed
to tell those parts of the story
that make British people
feel good about themselves.
That's all very well and good,
but it does come at a cost.
And I couldn't help thinking
when I was walking around this thing:
This was the summer of 2012,
this was the summer
when the Olympic Games
was coming to London.
So at exactly the moment
when the entire world
was arriving in our city,
the message that we were advertising
was that we will remember
our wartime dead,
but we won't remember yours.
It's like the exact opposite
of the Olympic spirit.
It's not only the British who do this,
of course it's not.
Every nation does it,
the Americans, for example.
The Americans like to call
their wartime veterans
"the greatest generation
that any society has ever produced",
as if they have some kind of monopoly
on heroism or something.
(Laughter)
They backed it up
with a thousand Hollywood movies
full of square-jawed American heroes
defeating evil in the name
of truth and freedom.
The Chinese are the same.
You know that in 2013 alone,
Chinese TV companies produced
over 200 TV dramatizations
about the Second World War,
each of them telling
almost an identical story.
Only, of course, this time,
it's the Japanese
who are all the evil monsters,
and the Chinese
who are all selfless heroes.
And, of course, I could say
the same thing about the French
or the Koreans or the Norwegians
or the Greeks.
We all do this.
We all like to think
that we were the heroes.
that we were the victims.
But what we don't like to remember
is those grey areas.
And it's that which I find
most uncomfortable about this,
because, as far as I am concerned,
it's the grey areas
that make history interesting.
In a sense, all good history
is about the grey areas.
But a lot of people
don't seem to have time
for complicated stories.
They don't have time for difficult
and uncomfortable emotions.
In fact, I'm quickly coming
to the conclusion
that a lot of people
don't really have time for history at all.
What they really want is a myth.
Now, you might ask yourselves:
What does any of this matter?
I mean, we all like
a good story, don't we?
If that story makes us feel
good about ourselves,
then so much the better.
It's all in the past anyway,
so what does it matter?
But that's just the problem, isn't it?
Because it's not all in the past.
And there is a dark side
to all of these stories and myths
that can be really damaging.
When the former Yugoslavia
tore itself apart in the 1990s,
it did so with World War II
songs on its lips,
and World War II atrocities in its heart.
When the Ukraine crisis broke out in 2014,
Ukrainians and Russians accused
one another of acting like Nazis.
And then, of course,
Hillary Clinton weighed in
and started comparing
Vladimir Putin to Hitler.
These sorts of comparisons
don't do anything
to foster rational debate.
If you were in an argument with someone,
the last thing that is going
to calm things down
is that you start accusing them
of being a Nazi.
If you don't believe me,
next time you're in an argument
with your wife or your husband,
give it a try and see
what kind of reaction you get.
(Laughter)
I can see some of you
seem to have tried it.
(Laughter)
My point is that as soon as we start
bringing the Second World War
into any of our arguments,
we get so sort of carried away
with our own national myths
that all we actually end up doing
is stirring things back up again.
Let me give you a couple of examples.
Take this economic crisis
which has rocked the world since 2008.
Here we are in Athens, and you all know
about the economic crisis.
All across Southern Europe,
people have been suffering
a real austerity,
and largely this has been imposed
by the European Union.
But it's not always the European Union
that gets the blame for this.
Quite often, as the largest
and most powerful country in the union,
it's Germany that gets the blame.
Now, how has this been
portrayed in the press?
Have we had a calm, rational
economic debate about it?
This is the way that the Italian press
portrayed the situation in 2012:
"Quarto Reich."
(Laughter)
"The Fourth Reich."
This is the Italian way of saying
that modern-day Germany
is no better than the Nazis,
as if there is a direct link
between World War II and today.
And take a look at that picture.
They've managed to dig something out
that makes it look like Angela Merkel
is making a Nazi salute.
(Laughter)
How about the Greek press?
How have the Greeks portrayed it?
Well, here is a Greek newspaper.
(Laughter)
from the same year,
2012,
and you will notice a photograph
of Angela Merkel once again,
this time in a Nazi uniform.
Obviously, it has been photoshopped.
But what about that headline in red?
"Memorandum macht frei."
This is a direct reference to the motto
that was written above the gates
of the concentration camps
in places like Auschwitz and Dachau.
The implication here
is that the whole of Greece
is going to become like one giant
German concentration camp
as a consequence of the economic deal
they've had to do.
Now, this is the sort of thing
that makes an historian like me
want to just give up and go and become
a window cleaner or something.
(Laughter)
I mean, it's historical nonsense.
None of these headlines have anything
to do with the Second World War at all.
They are about a modern-day problem,
a modern situation.
The only reason to mention
the Second World War
is to provoke an emotional response.
If I have one message that I want you
to take away with you today, it is this:
Whenever you hear a politician,
or a journalist, or a diplomat,
mention the Second World War,
I want alarm bells to ring.
Because when public figures
speak about the Second World War,
they are not talking
about what actually happened,
they're invoking a myth.
So whenever you hear
a politician mention the war,
I want you to ask yourselves
what it is he is really trying to do.
Is he trying to inspire you? -
In which case
that is relatively harmless.
Or is he trying to fill you with fear?
Is he trying to draw people together?
In which case, again,
that is relatively harmless.
Or is he really trying
to drive people apart?
And above all, I want you
to remind yourselves,
and to remind everybody you know,
that the Second World War is over.
(Laughter)
We live in a different world,
with different values
and different problems.
These problems will never be solved,
and they certainly will never
be solved peacefully,
if all we can think to do
is to resurrect the Second World War.
You know, history is a messy business,
particularly the history
of the Second World War.
It's not there to make us
feel good about ourselves;
it's often ugly and uncomfortable,
and desperately complicated.
It's full of those grey areas.
If we could all just learn to accept that,
then this world, our world,
would be a much more peaceful place.
Thank you.
(Applause)